in this Example The Notebook uh is quite
uh instructive because it refers to a
small data set um and I think uh working
with small data sets are actually handy
in the beginning when you are trying to
understand what is going on here we have
the classic case of dogs versus cats we
have also the simplest possible task in
machine learning which is classification
image classification in this case and we
are going to be using convolutional
layers in order to detect no no sorry to
detect to
classify uh the um presence of a dog or
a cat on in in an image okay or cats in
this case all right so um the uh uh data
set is available in kagle the original
data set contained 25,000 images but we
have cut down uh to 1,000 images uh per
class and uh we have a split the data
set into uh train and validation and
test data set okay all right so we are
going to uh obviously use train and
validation to create if you like our
model and of course we are going to
exercise some kind of prediction API uh
using our test data set after a model is
created so the architecture we're going
to be using here is an architecture that
we have kind of developed specifically
for this example
is uh consist evidently of convolutional
and and interleaf with Max pulling
layers and uh probably you recognize uh
the API here in this case is a kind of a
caras API uh similar architectures can
be develop for py the um first layer
over here is a convolutional layer uh
the um uh there is um uh input images of
150 by 150 pixels this is what the imag
that we have uh transformed uh now are
and each image is a naturally colored
image of three channels red green and
blue we have U 3x3 kernels and uh we
have the 32 here indicates the number of
filters okay or convolutional neurons
and we are going to be using a rectified
linear unit they exactly the same
nonlinearity that we have used uh in the
fully connected
layers uh then we are passing the output
feature map produced here and by the way
this is where you can actually see the
um uh the usage of that kind of formula
which I was pointing out regarding the
output feature map dimensions in an
earlier video uh the uh Max pooling
layer in this case is 2x two and it will
further uh shrink uh the output feat M
produced by the first layer selecting
the most important features out of it
passing it over to to a convolutional
layer uh with uh 64 filters here you see
now the pattern of increasing the number
of filters as the network becomes deeper
and deeper and uh at some point after
one two three four layers four
convolutional layers we are going to uh
have the head and uh I think it's
worthwhile going back into this uh vgg
kind of architecture and look exactly
where that head was in that architecture
and and couple it with with this code um
so here is the the point where the head
starts and the head in this case is a
concatenation of fully connected layers
why we have this kind of concatenation
and want do just a single layer um is uh
you know gradually even within the head
we need to gradually reach this point of
uh desired number of classes we have a
classification use case here um this is
a thousand classes that are need to be
present in at the top of the at the end
of the of this U Network and this is
basically the dimensionality of our
posterior probability uh distribution uh
we're going to have the a y hat if you
like that consist of a thousand numbers
uh a thousand are also the are the
number of classes in the image net data
set so this this Dimensions correspond
to the image net uh classifier uh data
set and so that's basically our head uh
there is uh also seen over here in this
code with uh this portion of the model
so we have whatever we have produced in
terms of convolutions over here and then
we flatten the network so we flatten oh
sorry flatten the output feature map
there by flattening the output F map we
are creating effectively uh a volume
we're taking a volume at the input and
we're flattening into a vector
VOR and uh this Vector then is passed as
input
to two dense layers the first dense
layer is has 512 neurons it takes
whatever dimensionality uh and we'll see
now the dimensions in a moment uh the
flatten layer provided and reduces that
just like any fully connected layer we
have seen in a corresponding video in a
different video uh earlier into 512
dimensions
and we use the rectified linear unit for
that and then with the subsequent layer
takes 512 dimensions and reduces it
further into gas into a single uh
Dimension because as we have seen in the
binary classification we have a binary
classification use case here either
we're going to have a cats or dogs we
have um uh just a scaler that we need
because that is the probability of the
positive glass whatever that positive
classes probably the dogs here uh and uh
we are of course going to be using
sigmoid uh because only at the output of
the sigmoid we are actually getting this
uh form of the posterior probability as
we had discussed in the uh fully
connected layers uh and in that in that
uh lecture all right so this is
basically our architecture uh very
simple architecture uh the convolution
portions the flatten and the fully
connected or dense uh portion to provide
the binary classification result at the
output and here is the U details of
um of our uh CNN so we can see uh the
input uh images that are actually we
coming in uh the uh first uh we have 32
filters as we discussed in terms of
number of
parameters um
896 18,000
73,000 147,000 so all of these are
parameters that you see being quoted
here in the uh next to the convolutional
layers but um the most striking thing
over here is this look at the number of
parameters which are involved in the
fully connected in one fully connected
or dense layer 3.2 million parameters so
out of the total 3 and A2 million
parameters that we have 3.2 million are
associated with a fully connected layer
and here is the kind of uh striking
example of um why it would make sense to
actually uh use CNN for uh image
classification if we didn't have the CNN
and the associated advantage of that CNN
provide which was actually also shown in
this kind of snapshot architecture as
you can see only the Loc
pixels the the one which are which are
local to the uh special dimensions of
the filter are so so-called firing in
order to produce that kind of scaler
okay as compared to a fully connected
architecture where everything that we
have here is going to be connected to
the layer um to to to form if you like
the output scaler z uh the convolutions
uh are operation is actually helping us
to significantly reduce the number of
parameters so uh at the end of the day
uh we have u u the scalar that indicates
the posterior probability of the
positive class as we discussed and then
uh the architecture is seems to be uh
valid uh we are going to evidently going
to use binary cross entropy just like
what we have done earlier in uh that
other video where we looked at dense
layers only for binary classification or
multiclass
classification uh and uh we are going to
have here well here the author selected
the uh RMS prop which
is uh one of the cousins of stochastic
gr descent we haven't really got any
discussion specifically on enhancements
of stochastic gr descent but if you do
replace it with SGD I think you will be
getting very similar performance um with
the corresponding learning parameter and
then of course the metric is our
accuracy and one of the things that we
would like to point out in U in this
kind of uh convolution and networks is
that we will need to do to be careful
when we uh first take a data set and we
try to process the images as we have
seen the images are typically given to
us as uh with pixels corresponds to
integer numbers so we have to uh
definitely normalize them uh we have to
B them we have to do a lot of this kind
of transformations in order for us to
produce uh the um the right uh inputs
for the uh for for our Network so after
a training process that involves
multiple epochs as we would expect we
have a model and uh we can actually plot
the uh training and
validation uh
loss as well also the corresponding kind
of accuracy and look at the corresp
responding loss over here plot as the
number of epochs and uh remember what we
have said in at the another video
regarding uh the uh condition of
overfitting and at that time the
discussion was an example of a linear
model on the regression task over here
we have a classification task but the
the sort of problem of over fitting is
present in across tasks in in in machine
learning so we see some quite
significant difference uh between
training and validation as the accuracy
is
improving and that is really what we
have said earlier as an a good indicator
of overfitting okay so uh it seems that
the um Network that we have designed
over here overfits the data set we are
given and it shouldn't be a complete
surprise to us given the fact that we
are throwing a significant number of
parameters um in um
in a network in a data set which only
has a th000 labels per class and so uh
we can actually engage any of the
techniques that we have seen in
overfitting uh to address overfitting
such as weight Decay any of the
regularization techniques that we have
seen also in neuron networks to to
address it but in computer vision we
have something else that could actually
help us and this is actually called the
documentation so I think it's worthwhile
going through
uh the data augmentation because it is
really a fairly straightforward and
widely used approach to avoid the
situation such as this where we have
overfeeding so in that augmentation what
we actually do we are taking the input
images and given the fact that we have
the knowledge of the class we try to
transform these input images in creating
more data so that's the an artificial
way of increasing the number of labels
we have in our data set we we have
various kind of Transformations we may
be shifting rotating images we may
sharing uh the image uh we have we are
zooming in zooming out uh and uh
flipping and so on we are definitely
going to be creating some uh nasty uh
cats um or dogs uh but definitely this
helps our Network to not overfit and so
if you are to just keep the exactly the
same network chitecture as we have seen
earlier not not touch at all the model
but definitely train the model with this
additional kind of uh data set uh then
uh uh look what happened uh we have a
training and validation loss which are
very close to each other so we actually
have solved the uh overfeeding problem
and our accuracy is uh both in terms of
training and validation are also very
close and close to some something like
85% okay so I think this is a good
example to showcase the U uh CNN models
uh as a as working for the simple task
of image classification and what we
actually also would like to understand
now next is um what we have said earlier
about Hey what how can we have some kind
of visualization into the internals of
the CNN to understand what is uh what is
actually learning and and this is what
we will be discussing next